what's in here what's it do and
can i make it from scratch it's
the stuff inside your
ingredients you can think of
lipstick as a slightly more
complicated crown crayons are
made of waxes and colors and
lipsticks have waxes and colors
in them too but if you've ever
tried drawing on your face with
a crayon you'll find that
doesn't really work the way
you'd like because crayons are
hard because they need to write
on a hard surface whereas
lipsticks have to be soft
because your lips are soft so in
addition to the waxes and colors
they also contain oils and a
bunch of other stuff depending
on exactly what type of lipstick
you buy but what I really want
to talk about is the reason you
buy lipstick in the first place
and that is its color
cochin eel is a scale insect
that feeds on prickly pear
plants and it was used to make
died in South America hundreds
of years ago these bugs produce
a chemical called carminic acid
which is this brilliant red
color to get the dye out of the
bugs you killa specifically you
kill the pregnant females
because that's where the diet
and it takes about ninety
thousand or so
bugs to make one kilogram of dry
coach Neil powder today we still
use coach Neil to color not just
lipsticks but also foods look
for coach Neil extract or
carmine which is made from
carminic acid on ingredients
label so at this point you might
be wondering why do we use bugs
to color food
I mean ideally wouldn't we just
make all of our colors in a lab
somewhere actually that is
mostly what happens these days
but it turns out that many of
the brilliant non-white
non-black colors are chemically
really hard to make so for most
of human history we've had to
rely on nature to do all the
complicated chemistry of color
making for us
hence the grinding up of bugs
now once chemist started being
able to make Reds like carmine
in a lab the use of bug juice
went way down
although it's been enjoying a
bit of a resurgence lately
because people have been asking
for all natural ingredients
go figure now if you look at the
ingredients of lipstick you'll
see that there's usually more
than one color ingredient and
typically these color
ingredients are described both
by a regular english name like
and seven lake or by a color
index or CI number and this
number can sometimes tell you
more than you think like a
secret code so for example any
number starting with 75 that is
a natural color so car- 75 470
any number starting with 77
that's an inorganic compound
which is basically something
that doesn't have carbon atoms
titanium dioxide which is white
and mixed with red to make pink
lipstick is 7789 one and then
there's 774 91 92 $STREET and 99
which are slightly different
versions of iron oxide also
known as rust
yep sometimes the rust red color
of your favorite lipstick is
literally rust so now that we
know it's in lipstick and how it
works i'm going to try and make
my own from scratch using
natural ingredients starting
with rust as my homemade
lipstick colorant and i'm going
to use mica for some glitter and
shine and micah comes from
granite and other rocks and this
stuff is the best glitter bomb
material i have ever seen it
gets everywhere and never comes
out so use that information
wisely as for my waxes I've got
beeswax which comes from bees
and paraffin wax which comes
from crude oil as for the oils
I've got canola oil and coconut
oil
I'm just going to assume that
the rest of the stuff and
lipstick doesn't matter all that
much so we'll see how right or
wrong I am
ok time to pour this into a
lipstick mold well so much for
that idea
now we let this hardened let's
try it
I made a bit of a mess of things
but here's the mold
I'm just gonna pop it open
wait wait here comes haha ok the
moment 4 30 have to say that's
actually the first time I've
ever done that
so let me get my mirror here and
seek
bottle o worker that's an
exiting hey not bad i really
sort of really get ok so we did
it we did it we made lipstick I
am
mm I can't tell though if it's
really glittery the red the iron
definitely worked but I don't
know if it shimmers as much as I
wanted it to
it's possible that the mica
settled to the bottom of the
mold while it was still cooling
and the way to fix that would be
to use even more finely divided
Micah but i would give this i
would give this give this a nine
out of ten and a half and half a
so if you guys have ideas on how
to improve this recipe let me
know in the comments or hit me
up on Twitter and if you have an
idea for episode let me know as
well